---
layout: default
---

# Docker

> Docker is a set of platform as a service products that use OS-level
> virtualization to deliver software in packages called containers.
> Containers are isolated from one another and bundle their own
> software, libraries and configuration files

## What is Docker?

"Docker" is a collection of applications that help package and
distribute applications. Installing Docker on a machine is similar
to installing a Java Virtual Machine. However, where a JVM
abstracts the CPU, Docker abstracts an entire system.

Docker (for the most part) is a comprised of 2 applications: the
Docker daemon and the Docker CLI. You will need at least the Docker
CLI installed on your local machine, and the Docker daemon could be
running elsewhere. Having the daemon installed elsewhere is perhaps
something you don't need to worry about to start with though.

> 💡 Docker used to be only truly a Linux application, as it relied
> on features available in the Linux kernel. When installing "Docker
> Desktop" for Windows or Mac, you are installing an application that
> is managing a Linux virtual machine, which itself is being used to
> manage virtual machines...
>
> There is however now native Windows support.


## Installing

> 🚨 For Windows, Microsoft Hyper-V is required to run Docker
> Desktop. When Hyper-V is enabled, VirtualBox no longer works.

Instructions for getting Docker installed onto your machine can be found on the docker website.

 - [Windows install](https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-windows/install/)
    - [WSL install](https://nickjanetakis.com/blog/setting-up-docker-for-windows-and-wsl-to-work-flawlessly)
 - [Mac install](https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/install/)
 - [Linux install](https://docs.docker.com/install/linux/docker-ce/ubuntu/)


> 😮 Because Docker uses Linux kernel features, Docker doesn't
> currently work directly on WSL. However, WSL2 has been released,
> which ships with an actual Linux kernel. It is only available in
> Windows builds 18917 and higher.




## First container


This is the same steps as
https://docs.docker.com/get-started/part2/ but with one of my
repos.


### Defining a Dockerfile


Clone the project from GitHub

```
git clone https://github.com/alxwrd/bus-stop.git
cd bus-stop
```

This is a single-page web app that displays the current bus
information for the bus stop outside my office.

In the repo, there is a file called Dockerfile. This is similar in
concept to a Makefile and is what is used to define the resulting
Docker image.

```
FROM nginx:latest
 
COPY index.html /usr/share/nginx/html
COPY main.js /usr/share/nginx/html
COPY style.css /usr/share/nginx/html
 
EXPOSE 80
 
CMD ["nginx", "-g", "daemon off;"]
```


`FROM` specifies which image to use as the parent image. The
important concept here is that this is also just a Docker image,
which could be used in a container. Images can be found on the
Docker Hub. The Dockerfile for Nginx can be found on GitHub.

`COPY` copies local files into the new Docker image.

`EXPOSE` opens up a port.

`CMD` runs a command in a running container.


### Building an image


You can now build an image from this Dockerfile using the command

```
docker image build -t bus-stop .
```


`docker image build` is the build command, while `-t bus-stop` "tags"
our resulting image. This is important because you can view images
already built on your machine using

```
repos/bus-stop$ docker images
REPOSITORY          TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE
bus-stop            latest              ab443971cc03        2 hours ago         127MB
nginx               latest              2073e0bcb60e        3 weeks ago         127MB
```

Untagged images will just show up as

```
REPOSITORY          TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE
<none>              <none>              0e63f6aabdc9        22 seconds ago      154MB
```

Building an image can be seen synonymous with building or compiling
source code.

Once an image is build, you can use it locally. Images can also be
exported with

```
docker save bus-stop > bus-stop.tar
# Or equivilantly
docker save --output bus-stop.tar bus-stop
```

Then loaded with

```
docker load < bus-stop.tar
# Or equivilantly
docker load --input bus-stop.tar
```

### Starting a container


Once the image has been built, we can run it in a container.

```
docker container run --publish 8000:80 --detach --name bus-stop bus-stop
```

`docker container run` is the command run a new container.
`--publish 8000:80` forwards traffic from port 8000 to the Docker
containers port 80. `--detach` forks the process so it can run in the
background. `--name` name's the running container, without this the
container gets a random name generated by the Docker daemon.

Opening http://localhost:8000/ you should see the web app which is
being served by Nginx.

In addition to starting this container, it has also been added to
the list of containers managed by your instance of Docker.

You can view all instances with

```
repos/bus-stop$ docker container ls --all
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND                  CREATED              STATUS                          PORTS                      NAMES
fcab388de37b        bus-stop            "nginx -g 'daemon of…"   About a minute ago   Exited (0) About a minute ago                              bus-stop
```


To stop the container you can use

```
docker container stop bus-stop
```

And to remove the container

```
docker container rm bus-stop
```




## WSL

By default, the `PATH` in [[WSL]] includes the Windows `PATH`. After
Docker Desktop for Windows is installed, it will include shell scripts
alongside the Windows binaries. This means that running `docker` in WSL,
will find the `docker` script in `/mnt/c/Program Files/Docker/Docker/resources/bin`.
This script just prints out a message about setting up Docker using WSL2.

To install Docker for Windows and use it from WSL, you can just run the
Windows Docker binary from WSL.

```batch
del /f "C:\Program Files\Docker\Docker\resources\bin\docker-compose"
del /f "C:\Program Files\Docker\Docker\resources\docker"

mklink "C:\Program Files\Docker\Docker\resources\bin\docker-compose" "C:\Program Files\Docker\Docker\resources\bin\docker-compose.exe"
mklink "C:\Program Files\Docker\Docker\resources\docker" "C:\Program Files\Docker\Docker\resources\docker.exe"
```

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[WSL]: wsl "WSL"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"